Document alerting (#2570)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/tutorials/observability/alerting/configure-alertmanager/_index.md

---
linkTitle: Configuring alerting
title: How to configure alerting
description: Guide explaining how to configure alerting in the Observability Platform.
menu:
  principal:
    identifier: tutorials-observability-alerting-configuration
    parent: tutorials-observability-alerting
weight: 40
last_review_date: 2025-04-24
user_questions:
  - How to configure Alertmanager?
  - How to visualize the existing alerting configuration?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
---

The Giant Swarm Observability Platform provides an [alerting pipeline]({{< relref "/overview/observability/alerting/" >}}) that you can configure per tenant. This tutorial will guide you on this process.

## Configure Alertmanager

The Observability Platform uses Mimir Alertmanager as the central tool to provide its alerting capabilities.

Once you have configured your list of tenants, you can easily create an Alertmanager configuration for that tenant by creating the following secret on your management cluster.

Here is an example

> ```yaml

Author: ```suggestion

```yaml
```

apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  labels:
    # This marks this secret as an Alertmanager configuration
    observability.giantswarm.io/kind: alertmanager-config
    # This is where the tenant label must be configured
    observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: my-team
  name: my-alertmanager-config
  namespace: default
data:
  # This is mandatory and contains the actual Alertmanager configuration.
  alertmanager.yaml: |
    route:
      receiver: "example_receiver"
      group_by: ["example_groupby"]
    receivers:
      - name: "example_receiver"
    templates:
      - example_template.tmpl
  # The secret can also contain any number of [reusable template files](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/notification_examples/#defining-reusable-templates) that must be in the form `filename.tmpl`. Any other entry will be ignored.
  example_template.tmpl: |
    {{ define "alert_customer_env_message" }}
    [{{ .CommonLabels.alertname }} | {{ .CommonLabels.customer }} | {{ .CommonLabels.environment }}]
    {{ end }}
type: Opaque
```

> When configuring Alertmanager for your tenant, please ensure that the defined configuration under `alertmanager.yaml` is valid or it will be rejected by a validating webhook. To that end, we advise you to use [`mimirtool`](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/manage/tools/mimirtool/#validate-alertmanager-configuration), the mimir cli too in your CI pipeline.

Author: ```suggestion
When configuring Alertmanager for your tenant, please ensure that the defined configuration under `alertmanager.yaml` is valid or it will be rejected by a validating webhook. To that end, we advise you to use [`mimirtool`](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/manage/tools/mimirtool/#validate-alertmanager-configuration), the Mimir CLI too in your CI pipeline.
```

---
linkTitle: Configuring alerting
title: How to configure alerting
description: Guide explaining how to configure alerting in the Observability Platform.
menu:
  principal:
    identifier: tutorials-observability-alerting-configuration
    parent: tutorials-observability-alerting
weight: 40
last_review_date: 2025-04-24
user_questions:
  - How to configure Alertmanager?
  - How to visualize the existing alerting configuration?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
---

The Giant Swarm Observability Platform provides an [alerting pipeline]({{< relref "/overview/observability/alerting/" >}}) that you can configure per tenant. This tutorial will guide you on this process.

## Configure Alertmanager

The Observability Platform uses Mimir Alertmanager as the central tool to provide its alerting capabilities.

> Once you have [configured your list of tenants]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/" >}}, you can easily create an Alertmanager configuration for that tenant by creating the following secret on your management cluster.

Reviewer: I don't think, that we ever use the terminology of "configuring a list of tenants" in the docs. It's more like "if you have listed a tenant in a Grafana Organisation". I think as it stands that might confuse people not having our insights. right? 
```suggestion
Once you have [listed a tenant in a Grafana Organisation]({{< relref "/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/" >}}, you can easily create an Alertmanager configuration for that tenant by creating the following secret on your management cluster.
```

> Here is an example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of the `my-alertmanager-config`-configuration for the `my-team`-tenant
```
